MEGAN:
It is the year 4032.
Man's destruction
of the environment
has created
evolutionary aberrations,
known as Abbies...
(roars)
...that rule the Earth.
(gasping, panting)
(Abby snarls)
One man saw
the catastrophe coming.
He created an ark for mankind
and selected a chosen few
to sleep for 2,000 years
and defy mankind's extinction.
Surrounded by mountains
and protected
by an electric fence,
the last of humanity
left alive on Earth
do their best to survive
in a town called Wayward Pines.
Previously on Wayward Pines...
We'll protect the harvesters.
What about the Abbies?
CJ: We have never used fire
on them before.
We don't know what
they understand about it.
Well, tonight
they'll learn.
Use the flamethrowers.
(Abbies howling)
Finally reached the city. JASON:
Pilcher  sent a dozen nomads
out beyond the fence,
and Adam's the only one
who's ever returned.
You knew all along.
You were working with Pilcher.
I want to call it off.
It's done, Adam.
My family is all gone
because of you.
Tell him. Xander
and I are married.
He's my husband.
I heard you caught one of those
creatures in the middle of town.
KERRY: It's the first female
we've ever seen.
MEGAN: As with any species,
they're different.
They're not just dumb animals.
There's a method to it,
if you can survive long enough
to learn it.
(birds singing)
♪ ♪
(soft, guttural grunt)
(purring gently)
(helicopter blades
whirring in distance)
(grunting, snarling)
(grunting)
(shouting)
♪ ♪
SOLDIER (over radio):
We've cleared the valley, sir.
We are commencing
the ground sweep
to confirm our perimeter
is secure.
(grunting)
SOLDIER:
Clear!
SOLDIER 2:
The area's secure, sir.
We can now begin
construction of the fence.
(panting)
(snarling)
Hmm.
We should have a baby.
You and I.
Really?
You're... ready to do that?
With me?
Well, we've encouraged
the First Generation
to procreate.
Enthusiastically.
(laughs)
I think we're ready
to set an example.
A son to lead.
Or a daughter.
Or a son.
(both laugh)
One of both.
(playful growling):
Four of both.
Mmm.
What's wrong?
It's nothing.
Just a lot on my mind.
Same as you.
It's okay to have hope.
We're doing well.
The town?
There's still the problem
with the rust
in the water line and...
I'm talking about us, Kerry.
We make a great team.
I knew you were
the right choice.
(instrumental blues music
playing on radio)
BARTENDER:
So, what'll it be?
Well, I tried your beer,
which is revolting.
And the whole celery soda thing,
I don't know what that is, so...
Your choice.
Mm.
How about that?
"Distilled from
pure Kentucky water"?
Really?
Where'd you get this?
Hassler drag it back in?
(chuckles)
It is a very nice label.
Unfortunately,
what's inside of it,
we brewed two weeks ago,
in the woods.
(chuckles)
Yeah, well...
(chuckling):
Sorry.
Whew...
You know what this place needs?
Hmm?
A town drunk.
Job's open.
I did look for you, Theo.
I did what I could to find you.
I'm here because I know
you have questions.
I'm tired of secrets.
Did you try
to have a baby?
(alarm wailing in distance)
(crowd clamoring outside)
(phone ringing)
(snarling, growling)
(roaring, snarling, screeching)
Everybody up! We got to go now!
MAN: What? Leave everything
behind, there's no time!
(blowing whistle,
people shouting)
Let's go, let's go!
Now! Now!
(woman screams, blow thuds)
WOMAN: Bastard!
(woman screams, Abbie growls)
(screams)
(snarling)
Hey!
(screeches)
(gasping)
Oh, no, Theresa...
(gunshots)
(alarm blaring)
WOMAN (over P.A. system): Attention,
citizens of Wayward Pines.
All able-bodied men,
please report
to the fire station immediately.
(Abbies suddenly screeching
and growling)
(pounding on walls,
rattling cages)
(growling, screeching continue)
♪ ♪
(men shouting)
Hey, hey, what's happening?
The crops-- they're on fire.
On fire? How?
We don't know what happened.
We're going out there.
Who's going out there?
Anyone who can.
WOMAN:
We need help!
(alarm blaring)
You should get
to the hospital.
I meet you there and I'll
see what I can do here.
You should go.
KERRY: Dr. Yedlin,
we need your help.
Can you come with me now?
They're back, aren't they?
We've seen some
of them out there, yes.
Why are you sending civilians?
Soldiers to fight the Abbies,
civilians to fight the fires.
It's not the same thing.
Well, they'll die the same.
Should we just
let the crops burn?
If we lose the food,
then we're all dead.
What about the explorers?
CJ, the trucks?
We lost contact with them
ten minutes ago.
We need you at the
hospital right now.
WOMAN: Attention,
citizens of Wayward Pines.
All able-bodied men,
please report to
the fire station immediately.
...you guys there,
but we should think about...
You're going out there?
We need guns.
To fight against him?
No, to defend ourselves
against whatever's out there.
WOMAN: Attention,
citizens of Wayward Pines...
Can you get us in?
The Mountain?
Xander...
Look, I'm not trying to drag you
into something again.
I'm just trying
to avoid a slaughter.
I've worked with Jason
and I don't trust him.
We lose those crops,
we lose everything!
(men shouting)
All right,
we got to get this out!
Let's get the hoses over here!
Get the hoses!
(screeching, growling)
I've brought up tape, all
the gauze, saline and sutures.
The O.R. is ready.
They told us to prepare 20 beds.
Are we really expecting
20 patients all at once?
We'll need more.
Discharge some more.
More than 20?
We don't have
any tags.
What?
Triage tags.
Get some markers,
we'll write on
their forearms.
Hey, everybody...
Hey, ev... Stop!
Stop.
Listen to me.
I'll triage as they arrive,
and I'll assign them out.
Letters for each color.
G is green.
Green is minor.
Yellow can wait.
Red is immediate.
Black, deceased.
Do not let them
self-evaluate.
Listen to what I say
and be calm.
Look, I want you to know
where everything is right now,
because I don't want
any supply runs
when I got someone going
asystole on my table.
We're gonna offer the best care
to the most that we can.
You can do this.
Come here.
Can I just say, sir,
there is no one I'd rather
be in a mass casualty...
Shut up, Oscar.
Yes, sir.
(screaming, shouting, gunfire)
(moaning)
♪ ♪
(man wailing in distance)
(men wailing, shouting,
moaning in pain)
(indistinct conversations)
More suction.
All right, he's good.
Suture him up. Next!
Yes.
MAN: ...wounds to the
abdomen and chest.
He's gone.
These are bite marks.
Next!
More coming in!
Move! We need more
stretchers out here!
(grunts)
I'm okay.
The Abbies got past us
to the crops.
I'm fine!
Help her!
Yellow!
Stop the bleeding
in his shoulder.
She's hypotensive
and tachycardic.
Get her an I.V. bag.
Ampicillin, two grams.
We just used the last bag.
I looked.
You're sure?
Yes.
Okay, breathe.
Slowly, slowly.
(monitor beeping)
Her SAT's are dropping.
Theresa-- you're name's
Theresa, right?
Look at me.
My name's Theo.
I need you to look
at me right now.
You have a collapsed
lung and that's why
you're having trouble breathing.
OSCAR: Dr. Yedlin?
Now, I'm gonna
get you through this.
I'm not gonna leave you, okay?
Dr. Yedlin?
You got it.
I need your help!
Slow, breathe in.
And out.... in, out.
Good.
I'm not leaving you.
Very good.
I have to insert
this in your chest.
It's gonna hurt, but it's
gonna let you breathe.
Are you ready?
(gasping)
JASON: Dr. Yedlin?
That's better.
JASON: Dr. Yedlin!
Okay.
Why aren't the first generation
patients being prioritized?
They are if they're dying.
(man screaming)
The femoral artery--
I-I can't find it!
Clamp it off!
I'm trying,
there's just...
There's too much blood!
Dr. Yedlin,
I need you to do this.
I can't-- my hand is
in a patient right now.
You can do it.
Okay.
Put pressure on the thigh,
and have your fingers
find the artery.
Dig your fingers in there!
(screaming)
Okay, I think I found it!
Bring the clamp in.
Don't take your fingers off
until it's fully clamped.
I got it.
His heart rate's
coming down.
(monitor beeping, echoing)
(beeping fades away)
♪ ♪
(sighs)
No one could've predicted
what happened tonight.
I should've been
able to predict it.
That the fields
would burn?
How could you know that?
It's an impossible situation.
If I can't trust
my own instincts...
rely on what Pilcher
taught me, what good am I?
I should've had us
more prepared.
You did prepare us.
By planting them
in the first place.
'Cause nothing would grow
in Wayward Pines.
Why is that, Kerry?
What's wrong
with the soil here?
Why didn't Pilcher
account for it?
What did we do to it?
And what does it tell us
if we have to die
to get the food
we need to survive?
Who the hell are you?
Because I thought
you were the man
born to lead this town.
Trained by Pilcher himself
to usher mankind
Kerry... to the next
generation, but that is not
who I see
in front of me right now.
Because what I see...
is weakness.
And fear.
Are you the man born to lead?
Yes.
Then act like it.
And never let them
see you doubt it.
Even if you do.
Dr. Yedlin, hey.
I was out there
with the firefighters.
Uh...
one of them got a piece of me.
Huh.
How's your jaw?
Well, it hurts to smile.
Was that the point?
One of them.
Hey, I left our wife
in your office.
She actually saved
some lives, too, tonight.
But... I'll let her
tell you all about it,
since everything's
out in the open now.
Oh, and Doc,
the first one's free,
but the next one's
gonna cost you.
You still have feelings for him?
Our marriage was like all
the others in Wayward Pines.
At first,
there were rules.
There was surveillance.
We were no more than cellmates.
And I chose you
before any of this happened.
Dr. Yedlin, we... we need you.
THEO:
That's not an answer.
(sighs)
(breathing quickens)
(footsteps approaching)
(breathing hard)
Okay, uh, just...
just try not
to move too much.
Are you a doctor here?
Chief resident, yes.
Uh, Dr. Yedlin called on me
earlier tonight
to perform
a femoral artery clamp.
Theresa...
Who?
Theresa Burke.
Is...
Um, you should...
you should get some rest.
Is she dead?
I can't really discuss that.
She...
Just tell me.
I mean that, uh,
you have to be...
you have to be family.
The Abbies were targeting
any man with a hose.
Their goal, clearly,
was to stop us
from saving the crops.
You're saying the Abbies knew
what the men were doing
and targeted them?
MEGAN:
I'm sure it was very
confusing out there, Mario,
in the dark,
in the heat of the battle...
I know what I saw, ma'am,
as I watched my men die.
How many troops do we have left?
We lost half of the men, sir.
We have less than
20 soldiers left.
MEGAN:
Perhaps we should
reconsider recruiting so heavily
from the First Generation...
We'll recruit more of them.
It's an honor to serve
against a real enemy.
Our real enemy already did
what they came to do:
attack our food source.
I'm sorry, you make it sound
as if the Abbies had a plan.
They set fires at the corners,
so that it would spread faster.
The Abbies never used fire
as a weapon before.
Not in all the years
we've been here.
Until we used it against them
to harvest the crops.
We taught them.
And tonight, they learned.
Stop talking about them
as though they're human.
When the fields were on fire,
Margaret was calm, but the males
in the lab became
highly aggressive,
as if...
as if they knew
what was happening.
So if they did have a plan...
They had no plan!
The crops. Tell me.
The flame took the plants
down to the root.
The earth is scorched.
Replanting on that ground
would take months,
if the Abbies even let us.
So we only have the food
that's currently
in the storehouse.
JASON: No. Plant something
that grows quickly.
It won't work.
What are you saying?
That we'll starve to death?
Every human on the planet
starves to death?
In how long?
If nothing changes...
...less than six weeks.
JASON:
Today, we mourn the loss
of 35 members of this town.
35 members of our species.
It's easy.
It's easy to wake up
in the morning
and forget who we are.
It's easy to forget
that there are no more
second chances for humanity.
That this is it.
That we are it.
I'm told that people
used to tell stories.
Stories that mankind
began with only two people,
a man and a woman.
Now we number 1,178.
So today, I believe
that if we rose from two,
we can rise from this.
We are the hope of mankind.
We will survive.
For those lost.
And for the future.
SOLDIER:
Present arms!
Ready... aim...
fire!
Ready!
(rifles clicking)
Aim!
Fire!
(rifles fire)
Ready!
(rifles clicking)
Aim!
Fire!
(cash register dings)
Here you go.
Thank you.
XANDER:
Fellas.
Wayward Vine?
We're collecting the weapons
that were commandeered
from the armory last night.
Oh. MARIO: I need yours.
Hmm.
"Commandeered"?
Nope. No, I'm afraid I don't
know what you're talking about.
Oh, wait.
You mean the ones that we used
to save your asses.
You mean those weapons?
Yeah.
'Cause I do have
one of those.
I won't discover that
you kept some for yourself?
Nah.
I mean, we got no food.
Abbies just killed
a few dozen people.
We can't have citizens
running around
able to defend themselves,
can we?
That's your job.
You're doing great,
by the way.
Toss the place if you want.
You have a nice day.
Those shirts--
I always thought
they were an odd choice
of color.
Brown.
Of course...
I guess all you First Gens
aren't exactly
up on your history.
"Do not discuss the past"
and all that.
I know history.
I know your history.
Crashed out
of the Marines.
Drug dealer
given a second chance.
Pilcher chose everyone
for a reason.
Yours was
"resourcefulness."
Hmm.
But instead of
using that skill
to ensure the preservation
of our species,
you used it to help yourself.
How's business, Xander?
You know where I can find any
pills, any extra rations?
People are scared
about food,
so I'm sure there's
a nice profit to be made.
I know who you used to be.
And history?
I know it repeats itself.
(door bell jingles)
(door shuts)
Dr. Yedlin.
How are the wounded?
Five are still critical.
Three we just
discharged today.
You're about to have
a much bigger problem,
and that's medication.
Steroids, antibiotics--
they're all dangerously low.
It seems like
your lord and savior, Pilcher,
did not bring enough, nor
did he make any provisions
to generate pharmaceuticals.
Now, I think
I can probably synthesize
a very, very basic
form of penicillin
in the lab, but--
Pilcher thought
we would be
treating things like
ear infection
and strep throat.
He never anticipated
that we would have
so many war injuries,
or that we would go through
so much medication
so fast.
What did he anticipate?
How low are the supplies?
It's not an exaggeration
to say that people could
soon be dying
of a sinus infection.
Tetanus, certainly.
And if a major flu came, it
would have a devastating effect.
The food crisis--
we need to find a way forward,
a way of surviving
the shortages.
With the Abbies in retreat
once again, we have...
I'm afraid that's
no longer the case, sir.
In the last two hours,
the Abbies have reentered
the valley outside the fence.
Roughly 100
now hold territory
immediately outside
our borders.
CJ:
See? They learned from us.
They learned that the fields
were important,
they learned how to use fire,
they faked retreat,
ambushed us, and now
they cut off our escape.
"Ambush." "Retreat."
These are concepts
these things don't understand.
This is distracting us from
the problems we already have.
When are you gonna realize
that this is the problem?
Then what, Dr. Yedlin?
The Abbies should
inherit the Earth?
You're here as a doctor,
not as a military advisor.
You'd do well
to remember that.
How are we gonna survive?
(sighs)
(door creaking)
(monitor beeping)
♪ ♪
I was expecting
Pilcher.
He's busy. He sent me.
Don't worry, I walked,
and I wasn't followed.
Would you even know if you were?
He said it was done.
And it is.
Ethan won't be a problem
for you or for us.
He belongs to the future.
And she's yours.
You can have the life
you always wanted.
I heard you wanted
to call it off. Why?
I thought you loved her.
That doesn't make it right.
(door bell jangles)
(indistinct conversations
in distance)
WOMAN:
All right, nice to see you.
(door bell jingles, door shuts)
MAN:
Anything else, or is that it?
XANDER:
Be careful.
All right.
Good luck.
MAN:
Thank you.
(door bell jangles)
What is the matter with you?
Uh, you're gonna have
to help me out, here.
I saw you go into the alley.
Jason's already
thrown you
outside the fence once.
Becca...
The guns I understand,
and I helped you with that.
But if you kept some,
or you stole more pills...
Apples.
Excuse me?
I gave him apples.
Dale and his wife have got
three little kids
and I figured they could use
the extra fruit from the shop
more than I could.
I'm keeping my head down.
If the world's gonna end...
I'm gonna go out strong.
We weren't nothing...
Becca.
I know we had
our problems, but...
there were good times, too.
You know that.
People can change.
What they want and what
they need, it can change.
They don't want us
to be human in here,
but, uh... it happens.
Maybe you can ask
your other husband
if he knows what I mean.
And maybe you can tell me
when I'm coming back home.
(door bell jingles)
(panting)
(monitor beeping steadily)
Theresa.
I'm so sorry.
You weren't supposed
to follow Ethan.
I...
I just wanted us
to be together.
I'm so sorry that...
that-that I couldn't
protect you.
That I...
I couldn't save you.
Or that I did save you.
(cries quietly)
It's okay.
(laughs)
(echoing):
Happy birthday, sweetie.
(flat line tone)
(MRI whirring)
(equipment whirrs quietly)
Dr. Yedlin.
(growls) I'm sorry we
started without you;
I know you've been busy.
It's horrible,
what happened
outside the fence.
So many lives lost.
Yeah. Well, we're
gonna starve to death.
Well, that makes our work
that much more important.
What's the progress?
I am conducting
an MRI,
as per the very thorough
research guidelines
you sent over.
With the crops gone
and-and the Abbies
amassing outside,
we have to understand
why this one is so docile,
when the others
all want to kill us.
Wouldn't you agree?
Yes. That's why
I told you to do it.
Margaret holds the key;
I firmly believe that.
Still an animal...
of course, but
there is something
exquisite about her.
Now, what precisely
are we looking for?
I assume it's...
Temporal gyrus.
Advanced thought
and problem-solving,
center of language
for her brain.
I still have trouble
with the notion
that these creatures
such as...
Huh.
What is it?
The temporal gyrus
for a chimp is about the third
the size of a human's.
And hers appears to be
double the size of ours.
Do you think
she can understand us?
I, um...
I have a, um, spare bedroom
at my place.
I mean...
I...
I wouldn't impose, I just...
...thought maybe...
(whispering):
I'd give you your privacy.
Got any other pains
I should know about?
We were never close.
I want to ask you
something.
You're the only one who has
seen them, how they live.
How they move.
Do they communicate
in any way that you've seen?
I know they're
largely violent,
but it seems that
they have a purpose.
We've done some preliminary
tests with a female,
and it seems to me...
Did you say female?
How... how do you know
about the females?
They have one.
Up in the Mountain lab.
There's a female Abby
in this town?
Her palm-- does it have a mark?
A raised mark,
it's like a brand?
Tell me.
(roaring, howling in distance)
(roaring continues)
(kids chattering)
Can I take an apple?
Yeah, apples for dinner.
(distant roaring, screeching)
(growling, roaring, continuing)
(roaring continuing)
We're safe.
Right, Dr. Yedlin?
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH